---
permalink: /
title: "Hello there, I am Qiang Zhang!"
excerpt: "About me"
author_profile: true
redirect_from: 
  - /about/
  - /about.html
---

I am an assistant professor in the Department of Mechanical Engineering at the University of Alabama. My research is in the areas of biological signal-based neuromusculoskeletal modeling, control of rehabilitative/assistive robotic exoskeletons and functional electrical stimulation, human-robot interaction, human motion intent prediction, neuromuscular signals processing (surface electromyography and ultrasound US imaging), human locomotion biomechanics, Lyapunov-based nonlinear control and adaptive control, machine learning-based control, linear/nonlinear observer design, sensor fusion, and their applications to wearable robotic devices’ control and next-generation healthcare. 

Before joining UA, I was a postdoctoral research fellow under the supervision of Dr. He (Helen) Huang [(https://nrel.bme.unc.edu/brief-cv/)], Dr. Michael D. Lewek, and Dr. Derek Kamper, in the Advanced Rehabilitation Research Training Projects (ARRTs) funded by the National Institute on Disability, Independent Living, and Rehabilitation Research (NIDILRR) at the Closed-Loop Engineering for Advanced Rehabilitation (CLEAR) in the UNC/NCSU Joint Department of Biomedical Engineering at the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill and North Carolina State University. As a postdoctoral fellow, I focused on the research project of reinforcement learning-based robotic assistance personalization to improve locomotion performance in people with neurological disorders, such as paretic stroke. 

I got my Bachelor's degree in Mechanical Engineering from Wuhan University in 2014, my first Master's degree in Mechatronics Engineering from Wuhan University in 2017, my second Master's degree in Mechanical Engineering from the University of Pittsburgh in 2019, and my Ph.D. degree in Biomedical Engineering from the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill and North Carolina State University in 2021. Between 11/2021 and 08/2023, I was a postdoctoral research fellow of the Advanced Rehabilitation Research Training Projects (ARRTs) in the UNC/NCSU Joint Department of Biomedical Engineering at The University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill and North Carolina State University. I have been an active research assistant in working closely with the Neuromuscular Control and Robotics Lab (NCRL), the Neuromuscular Rehabilitation Engineering Lab (NREL), the Interdisciplinary Human Movement Research Lab at the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill and North Carolina State University, and the Multi-modality Biomedical Ultrasound Imaging Lab at the University of Pittsburgh on several research projects.​ 

My postdoctoral research efforts focused on the least square policy iteration reinforcement learning-based control for wearable robotic exoskeletons to provide personalized/customized assistance and improve walking functions for individuals with mobility deficits, such as post-stroke. I mainly investigated a hierarchical control framework for a bilateral wearable hip exoskeleton to provide personalized flexion/extension assistance during locomotion tasks. 

My Ph.D. research efforts were on human ankle joint effort prediction by using ultrasound imaging and surface electromyography fusion, assist-as-needed control of ankle exoskeleton during walking, and functional electrical stimulation-elicited ankle joint trajectory tracking control with ultrasound imaging-based muscle state feedback. I have collaborated on iterative learning control of a lower limb hybrid neuroprosthesis for sit-to-stand tasks, as well as model predictive control of the elbow joint by stimulating antagonistic muscles.

Prior to my Ph.D. training, the research work during my master's study focused on 1) the development of a lower limb bipedal walking robot with four active degrees of freedom and feedforward adaptive control design for its walking on compliant ground surface; 2) the development of an upper limb exoskeleton robot with four active degrees of freedom and two passive degrees of freedom and impedance control design to provide assistance when necessary. Each active DOF is actuated by a customized serial elastic actuator plus Bowden cable.

I have published my research work in various scientific peer-reviewed journals and conferences of IEEE, EMBS, IFAC, and ASME societies. I have been recognized and nominated for a bunch of awards, including (1) finalist for the Best Student Paper Award at the 16th IEEE/RAS-EMBS International Conference on Rehabilitation Robotics (ICORR 2019), (2) UNC/NCSU BME Department Travel Award (2020 and 2021), (3) UNC/NCSU BME Department Ph.D. Student Research Award (2021), (4) ASME DSCD Rising Star Award (2022), (5) Dean’s Distinguished Dissertation Award at UNC-Chapel Hill (2023), (6) NIDILRR-sponsored Early Career Investigator Symposium (2023), (7) finalist of the Journal of Biomechanics award (2023), (8) Diversity Travel Award of 2023 American Society of Biomechanics annual meeting (2023), and so on.

My academic training and more than eight years of experience working as a research assistant in three labs prepare me to be an effective researcher in the areas of human-in-loop robotics, biomechanics analysis, control of biomechatronic devices, and so on. I am always looking for opportunities where I can combine my research acumen with my research experience to help real-world medical and daily needs.
